feat: Add RT apps snap packaging to the existing tutorial (#99)
canonical/real-time-ubuntu-docs: docs/tutorial/7-snapping.md

Reviewer: hey @locnnil , could you please update all Snapcraft references capitalize the "S" so it's consistent.
..."Once the snap metadata boilerplate is in place, it’s time to define the [snapcraft parts](https://canonical-snapcraft.readthedocs-hosted.com/en/stable/explanation/parts/)."
...Additionally, you need to specify the source location for snapcraft to fetch the code. 
...Because compiling sources with a Makefile is common, Snapcraft provides [built-in plugins](https://snapcraft.io/docs/snapcraft-plugins) to simplify...

Author: Right, done here: 8a753fc

I've just not capitalize when I'm referring to the snapcraft snap (since the name of the snap is lowercase): 

...Install the [snapcraft snap](https://snapcraft.io/docs/snapcraft):

version: '0.1' # just for humans, typically '1.2+git' or '1.3.2'
summary: Single-line elevator pitch for your amazing snap # 79 char long summary
description: |
  This is my-snap's description. You have a paragraph or two to tell the
  most important story about your snap. Keep it under 100 words though,
  we live in tweetspace and your description wants to look good in the snap
  store.

grade: devel # must be 'stable' to release into candidate/stable channels
confinement: devmode # use 'strict' once you have the right plugs and slots

parts:
  my-part:
    # See 'snapcraft plugins'
    plugin: nil
```
You may also want to review the [snapcraft.yaml schema][snapcraft_yaml].
Which serves as a reference for understanding what is possible in the `snapcraft.yaml` file.

Your working directory should now look like this:

```console
$ tree
.
├── cfs.c
├── edf.c
├── fifo.c
├── lock.c
├── snap
│   └── snapcraft.yaml
└── thread-affinity.c

2 directories, 6 files
```

To streamline the build process for our real-time apps, we should create a Makefile.
This will also help with packaging.

Let's create one:

```{literalinclude} Makefile
:language: make

> ```

Author: Yeah, agree, moved here: https://github.com/canonical/real-time-ubuntu-docs/pull/99/commits/c9211cbb4c8bd78ff9384cefad9e4c5c62c813d6

We'll also make some modifications to the YAML manifest file:

- Change the name from **demo** to **rt-app**.
- Provide a meaningful summary and description of what the snap does.

### Defining the snap parts

> Once the Snap metadata boilerplate is in place, it's time to define the [snapcraft parts][snapcraft_parts].

Author: Done here: https://github.com/canonical/real-time-ubuntu-docs/pull/99/commits/c9211cbb4c8bd78ff9384cefad9e4c5c62c813d6

In Snaps, `parts` serve as the building blocks of the package, similar to a recipe's list of ingredients and preparation steps.

Since we have five `.c` source files, we might assume that we need five separate parts.

> While that approach is possible, it's much easier to leverage the Makefile we just created.

Author: Done: 7b799774e404ad

Because compiling sources with a Makefile is common, Snapcraft provides [built-in plugins][snap_plugins] to simplify the process.

To list the available plugins for your chosen [Snap base][snap_base] (as defined in the `base:` field of `snapcraft.yaml`), run `snapcraft plugins`:

```console
$ snapcraft plugins
Displaying plugins available to the current base 'core24' project
ant
autotools
cmake
dump
go
go-use
make
maven
meson
nil
npm
poetry
python
qmake
rust
scons
uv
colcon
conda
flutter
matter-sdk

> ```

Author: I've just dropped the console output, because this sentence also adds me the change to add a link regarding snap bases. Done here: 1f881a7

Since we build our `C` code using a Makefile, we can use the [make plugin][make_plugin].

```{tip}
The make plugin relies on the `DESTDIR` variable being available and configurable in the Makefile.

> It uses this variable to correctly place the built files inside the snap's squashfs file.

Author: This is what a snap file is. It's like to list a file showing the extension.

```

> We're also going to rename our part to something more meaningful, such as `src`.

Author: If it was exactly the same, I would change.  But since one is a label for the part and the other is something that implies a functionality, and it's already explained that this change to `src` is arbitrary in the previous sentence. I don't think is worth to change it.

:: gcc -Wall -Wextra -Wno-unused-result -O2 -o lock lock.c
:: gcc -Wall -Wextra -Wno-unused-result -O2 -o thread-affinity thread-affinity.c
:: + make -j12 install DESTDIR=/root/parts/src/install
:: mkdir -p /root/parts/src/install/bin
:: install -m 755 cfs edf fifo lock thread-affinity /root/parts/src/install/bin
Staging src
Priming src
Packing...
Reading snap metadata...
Running linters...
Running linter: classic
Running linter: library
Creating snap package...
Packed rt-app_0.1_amd64.snap
```

The first time you build a snap, it may take longer because Snapcraft also downloads and installs a [build provider][build_provider] (as seen in the logs).
It also provisions an [LXD container][lxd_container].

The build generates an artifact named `rt-app_0.1_amd64.snap`.
Each part of this name has a meaning:
- `rt-app`: The snap's name, as defined in the `name` field of `snapcraft.yaml`.
- `0.1`: The snap's version, as defined in the `version` field of `snapcraft.yaml`.
  This can be set dynamically based on a git tag or other information, as explained in [this document][using_craftctl_tool].
- `amd64`: The architecture of the build system.

>   Since we're doing a native build, Snapcraft detects the host architecture.

Author: Changed here:
e5979cc

It's possible to inspect the contents of this `.snap` file.
Since a Snap is a [squashfs] file, as explained in the [Snap format document][snap_format], we can unsquash it:

```console
$ unsquashfs rt-app_0.1_amd64.snap
Parallel unsquashfs: Using 12 processors
6 inodes (6 blocks) to write

[==================================================================|] 12/12 100%

created 6 files
created 4 directories
created 0 symlinks
created 0 devices
created 0 fifos
created 0 sockets
created 0 hardlinks
```

This creates the `squashfs-root` directory with the following contents:

```console
$ tree squashfs-root/
squashfs-root/
├── bin
│   ├── cfs
│   ├── edf
│   ├── fifo
│   ├── lock
│   └── thread-affinity
└── meta
    ├── gui
    └── snap.yaml

4 directories, 6 files
```

Now that we've confirmed that the real-time app binaries are present, it's time to define the apps.

### Defining snap apps

A Snap doesn't necessarily need to have apps defined—it can provide only files such as libraries or binaries.
These are generally referred to as content Snaps, as they use the [content interface][content_interface].

> That's why it's possible to build a Snap successfully without defining any apps.

Author: I will keep this and put inside a note. Done here 5d80e00

```yaml
apps:
  cfs:
    command: bin/cfs

  edf:
    command: bin/edf

  fifo:
    command: bin/fifo

  lock:
    command: bin/lock

  thread-affinity:
    command: bin/thread-affinity

```

After defining the apps, we can rebuild the Snap by running `snapcraft -v` again.
The second build is faster than the first one because the necessary dependencies are already available.
Also the necessary resources are already created by the build provider (which is a lxd container in this case).

We can then install the Snap using:

```console
$ sudo snap install rt-app_0.1_amd64.snap
error: cannot find signatures with metadata for snap "rt-app_0.1_amd64.snap"
```

The command fails because we're installing a locally built artifact.
According to the [Snap install modes document][snap_install_modes], when developing and testing a Snap, it's recommended to install it in `devmode`:

```console
$ sudo snap install ./rt-app_0.1_amd64.snap --devmode
rt-app 0.1 installed
```
Now, the Snap appears in the list of installed Snaps:

```console
$ snap list rt-app
Name       Version         Rev    Tracking       Publisher    Notes
rt-app     0.1             x1     -              -            devmode

> ```

Reviewer 2: Isn't `snap info` a better thing to present, showing metadata and commands?

Author: It's better but doesn't present the installation mode. 

But anyway, it shows more information, so I've replaced here: d0126d67487c85

Finally, we can run the defined real-time applications.
Within a Snap, the defined applications become [application commands][application_cmds].
By typing the name of the installed Snap and pressing the Tab key twice, we can list the available commands:

```console
$ rt-app.
rt-app.cfs              rt-app.edf              rt-app.fifo             rt-app.lock             rt-app.thread-affinity
```

Running the `cfs` program:

```console
$ rt-app.cfs
Calls made on thread1: 100000
Calls made on thread2: 1
```

### Strictly confining the snap

> In the previous section, we created a Snap that works when installed in `devmode`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the previous section, we created a Snap that works when installed in the Developer Mode.
```

The complexity of the application determines the best approach.
If the application has multiple configurations, each triggering different execution paths, a full source code analysis is preferable.
However, if the application has a single, fixed execution path, debugging tools alone may be sufficient.

A variety of resources and tools exist for [debugging Snaps][debug_snaps].
The recommended tool for debugging and initial confinement is [snappy-debug].

To install it:

```console
$ sudo snap install snappy-debug
snappy-debug 0.36-snapd2.59.4 from Canonical✓ installed
```

Now, we need two terminals: one to run `snappy-debug` and another to execute the `rt-app` Snap applications.
Running `snappy-debug` presents the following message:

```console
$ snappy-debug
INFO: Following '/var/log/syslog'. If have dropped messages, use:
INFO: $ sudo journalctl --output=short --follow --all | sudo snappy-debug
```

To ensure no log messages are lost, it is recommended to use the suggested `journalctl` command.
It needs to be run with `sudo` since accessing system logs requires privileged access:

```shell
sudo journalctl --output=short --follow --all | sudo snappy-debug

> ``` 

Reviewer 2: Make this a tip?

Author: Yeah, makes sense: 1ffaffc

# Snap your real-time app

Now that you have your real-time app working, it's time to package it.
This section describes how to package your real-time app as a [snap package][snapcraft.io].

## Install requirements

Some dependencies are required when building snap packages:

- Confirm that you have [snapd][snapd] installed by running the `snap version` command.
  If you're using Ubuntu, it should come pre-installed. 
  Otherwise, refer to the [snapd installation docs][install_snapd].

- Install the [snapcraft snap][snapcraft_docs]:
  ```shell
    sudo snap install --classic snapcraft
  ```

## Start to package

It is easier to create the snap by starting from a template.
Run the following command from the same directory where the source `.c` files reside:

```{terminal}
   :input: snapcraft init
   :user: ubuntu
   :host: ubuntu
   :dir: ~/tutorial

Go to https://docs.snapcraft.io/the-snapcraft-format/8337 for more information about the snapcraft.yaml format.
Successfully initialised project.
```

> This command creates a `snap` directory containing the :file:`snapcraft.yaml` file.

Author: Fixed here: https://github.com/canonical/real-time-ubuntu-docs/pull/99/commits/c14ef1c43ef4342b4a3eb92e94524f429d91130a

summary: Single-line elevator pitch for your amazing snap # 79 char long summary
description: |
  This is my-snap's description. You have a paragraph or two to tell the
  most important story about your snap. Keep it under 100 words though,
  we live in tweetspace and your description wants to look good in the snap
  store.

grade: devel # must be 'stable' to release into candidate/stable channels
confinement: devmode # use 'strict' once you have the right plugs and slots

parts:
  my-part:
    # See 'snapcraft plugins'
    plugin: nil
```
You may also want to review the [snapcraft.yaml schema][snapcraft_yaml], which is the reference for all the possible configuration keys for the :file:`snapcraft.yaml` file.

Your working directory should now look like this:

```{terminal}
   :input: tree
   :user: ubuntu
   :host: ubuntu
   :dir: ~/tutorial

.
├── cfs.c
├── edf.c
├── fifo.c
├── lock.c
├── snap
│   └── snapcraft.yaml
└── thread-affinity.c

2 directories, 6 files
```

You'll need to make some modifications to the :file:`snapcraft.yaml` file:

- Change the name from **demo** to **rt-app**.
- Provide a meaningful summary and description of what the snap does.

### Define snap parts

> Once the snap metadata boilerplate is in place, it's time to define the [Snapcraft parts][snapcraft_parts].

Reviewer 2: Why not simplify to Define parts and Define apps?

> Once the snap metadata boilerplate is in place, it's time to define the [Snapcraft parts][snapcraft_parts].

Author: For me, it feels like the correct one should be "snap parts" or "snapcraft.yaml parts", because "Snapcraft parts" doesn't make sense.

Snapcraft it's the tool, it doesn't have parts, the snap does, so if it was "snapcraft.yaml parts" then it would be correct.

But, looking at other documentations on snapcraft.io/docs, often they just say "part(s)" only. So I'm going with the "Define parts" and "Define Apps" as you suggested, I've also changed the body text reference to be just "parts".

Running linters...
Running linter: classic
Running linter: library
Creating snap package...
Packed rt-app_0.1_amd64.snap
```

The first time you build a snap, it may take longer because Snapcraft also downloads and installs a [build provider][build_provider] (as seen in the logs).
It also provisions an [LXD container][lxd_container].

The build generates an artifact named `rt-app_0.1_amd64.snap`.
Each part of this name has a meaning:
- `rt-app`: The snap's name, as defined in the `name` field of {file}`snapcraft.yaml`.
- `0.1`: The snap's version, as defined in the `version` field of {file}`snapcraft.yaml`.
  This can be set dynamically based on a git tag or other information, as explained in [this document][using_craftctl_tool].
- `amd64`: The architecture of the built snap.
  This matches the host's architecture when doing a native build.
  The C programs and the snap can also be built for other architectures, for example using the [Canonical build farm][remote_build] or by cross compiling the sources and manually setting the target snap architecture.
  It is also possible to cross compile using a plugin if the project used [ autotools][cross_compile_autotools].

> Now you verify that the real-time applications are packed into the snap by inspecting the contents of this `.snap` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now you can verify that the real-time applications are packed into the snap by inspecting the contents of this `.snap` file.
```

> Since a snap is a [squashfs] file, as explained in the [snap format document][snap_format], you can unsquash it:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since a snap is a [SquashFS file][snap_format] file, you can unsquash it:
```
Hyperlink to wikipedia isn't useful here. Propose adding that hyperlink to the referenced snap format doc.

These are generally referred to as content snaps, as they use the [content interface][content_interface].
That's why it's possible to build a snap successfully without defining any apps.
```

Create an `apps` section with one entry per app: `cfs`, `edf`, etc.
These are the names given to the apps, exposed on the system when installing this snap.

Each app requires a `command`.
The programs are inside the `bin` directory and you can define the relative path to them:

```yaml
apps:
  cfs:
    command: bin/cfs

  edf:
    command: bin/edf

  fifo:
    command: bin/fifo

  lock:
    command: bin/lock

  thread-affinity:
    command: bin/thread-affinity

```

After defining the apps, you can rebuild the snap by running `snapcraft -v` again.

You can then install the snap using:

```{terminal}
   :input: sudo snap install rt-app_0.1_amd64.snap --devmode
   :user: ubuntu
   :host: ubuntu
   :dir: ~/tutorial

rt-app 0.1 installed
```

```{note}
Since the snap is being installed from a local snap bundle, you would typically install it in [Dangerous Mode][snap_install_modes] to bypass signature verification.

> However, because the snap uses `confinement: devmode`, it must be installed using Developer Mode (--devmode).

Reviewer 2: @locnnil please build locally and verify the suggestions before making changes. This is creating a long dash:
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/5c5b2a85-9fe8-4e3c-9dd8-87cf6285fcb9)

> However, because the snap uses `confinement: devmode`, it must be installed using Developer Mode (--devmode).

Author: @farshidtz thanks for letting me know, I'm going to submit a tiny fix pr for this.

This happens because there are some denials coming from the security policies defined in the snap sandboxing, which potentially do not affect the functionality of an application.
This is the case for this app.

### Conclude strict confinement

Now that the required interfaces are defined, change the `confinement` property to `strict`:

```yaml
confinement: strict
```

```{tip}
During the confinement process for your real-time applications, you used [snappy-debug] to identify the necessary security policies.
This approach is especially effective for smaller applications or when you do not have access to the source code.
If your application follows a single, fixed execution path, debugging tools alone may suffice.
However, if it supports multiple configurations, each triggering different execution paths, a comprehensive source code analysis is preferable.
Such analysis should identify all required files, directories, and [syscalls] and may include reviewing access to Linux-specific resources such as [procfs], [sysfs], and [configfs].

The optimal approach depends on your application's complexity and whether you have access to its source code.

> ```

Reviewer 2: A little misplaced. I suggest moving the tip to line 489.

> # Snapping your real-time app

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Snap your real-time app
```

we typically use base verbs (snap) instead of present continuous (snapping) for instructions / commands. 
same comment for all other headings.

Author: Right, thank you for the information. 

I've made the changes here: b5a4715

> Now that you have our real-time app working, it's time to package it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that you have your real-time app working, it's time to package it.
```

This section describes how to package your real-time app as a [snap package][snapcraft.io].

> ## Installing requirements

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Install requirements
```

action-oriented headings.

```yaml
name: demo # you probably want to 'snapcraft register <name>'
base: core24 # the base snap is the execution environment for this snap
version: '0.1' # just for humans, typically '1.2+git' or '1.3.2'
summary: Single-line elevator pitch for your amazing snap # 79 char long summary
description: |
  This is my-snap's description. You have a paragraph or two to tell the
  most important story about your snap. Keep it under 100 words though,
  we live in tweetspace and your description wants to look good in the snap
  store.

grade: devel # must be 'stable' to release into candidate/stable channels
confinement: devmode # use 'strict' once you have the right plugs and slots

parts:
  my-part:
    # See 'snapcraft plugins'
    plugin: nil
```
You may also want to review the [snapcraft.yaml schema][snapcraft_yaml], which is the reference for all the possible configuration keys for the `snapcraft.yaml` file.

Your working directory should now look like this:

```{terminal}
   :input: tree
   :user: ubuntu
   :host: ubuntu
   :dir: ~/tutorial

.
├── cfs.c
├── edf.c
├── fifo.c
├── lock.c
├── snap
│   └── snapcraft.yaml
└── thread-affinity.c

2 directories, 6 files
```

> 
> 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

unnecessary blank lines

Author: Done: https://github.com/canonical/real-time-ubuntu-docs/pull/99/commits/b5a4715c7d55b747c48843a7dcb0b809e40235c9#diff-37f91493b7fc85eb61e3afb8b07f721cfcdea65d362fe625f556cb7e57be919cL79-L80

> You'll also make some modifications to the `snapcraft.yaml` file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You'll need to make some modifications to the `snapcraft.yaml` file:
```

Reviewer: nitpick

but there is a "{file}` role.
https://github.com/canonical/sphinx-docs-starter-pack/blob/main/docs/reference/doc-cheat-sheet.rst?plain=1#L38

the current formatting is the same as inline code but it helps to use it if there is an update for consistency in future.

Author: Thanks for letting me know, I've changed here to use the `file` role: 51bcc878cf4615d

sentence fixed here: a5885f4

- Change the name from **demo** to **rt-app**.
- Provide a meaningful summary and description of what the snap does.

> ### Defining the snap parts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Define the snap parts
```

Author: Done here: b5a4715.

Thank you.

Reading snap metadata...
Running linters...
Running linter: classic
Running linter: library
Creating snap package...
Packed rt-app_0.1_amd64.snap
```

The first time you build a snap, it may take longer because Snapcraft also downloads and installs a [build provider][build_provider] (as seen in the logs).
It also provisions an [LXD container][lxd_container].

The build generates an artifact named `rt-app_0.1_amd64.snap`.
Each part of this name has a meaning:
- `rt-app`: The snap's name, as defined in the `name` field of `snapcraft.yaml`.
- `0.1`: The snap's version, as defined in the `version` field of `snapcraft.yaml`.
  This can be set dynamically based on a git tag or other information, as explained in [this document][using_craftctl_tool].
- `amd64`: The architecture of the built snap.
  This matches the host's architecture when doing a native build.
  The C programs and the snap can also be built for other architectures, for example using the [Canonical build farm][remote_build] or by cross compiling the sources and manually setting the target snap architecture.
  It is also possible to cross compile using a plugin if the project used [ autotools][cross_compile_autotools].

> It's possible to inspect the contents of this `.snap` file.

Reviewer: i think this should explain why you would want to inspect the contents of the .snap file.

it's explained a little down the line (e.g. "now that you've confirmed that the real-time app binaries are present...") but i think it's clearer to give context along with the instructions instead of after.

Author: Right, I've changed this sentence to include a context here: a8ca5d476e93513b7290a0

│   ├── edf
│   ├── fifo
│   ├── lock
│   └── thread-affinity
└── meta
    ├── gui
    └── snap.yaml

4 directories, 6 files
```

Now that you've confirmed that the real-time app binaries are present, it's time to define the apps.

### Defining snap apps

You created the snap but installing it will not expose any of the programs on the host.
This is because you haven't specified the apps within the snap.
```{note}
A snap doesn't necessarily need to have apps defined—it can provide only files such as libraries or binaries.
These are generally referred to as content snaps, as they use the [content interface][content_interface].
That's why it's possible to build a snap successfully without defining any apps.
```

Create an `apps` section with one entry per app: `cfs`, `edf`, etc.
These are the names given to the apps, exposed on the system when installing this snap.

Each app requires a `command`.
The programs are inside the `bin` directory and you can define the relative path to them:

```yaml
apps:
  cfs:
    command: bin/cfs

  edf:
    command: bin/edf

  fifo:
    command: bin/fifo

  lock:
    command: bin/lock

  thread-affinity:
    command: bin/thread-affinity

```

> After defining the apps, you can rebuild the snap by running `snapcraft -v` again.
> The second build is faster than the first one because the necessary dependencies are already available.
> Also the necessary resources are already created by the build provider (which is a lxd container in this case).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After defining the apps, you can rebuild the snap by running `snapcraft -v` again.
```

I suggest removing this; I think we're doing too much explanation for snaps.

You can then install the snap using:

```{terminal}
   :input: sudo snap install rt-app_0.1_amd64.snap
   :user: ubuntu
   :host: ubuntu
   :dir: ~/tutorial

error: cannot find signatures with metadata for snap "rt-app_0.1_amd64.snap"
```

> The command fails because you're installing a locally built artifact.

Reviewer: is it necessary to run this command twice?
i understand the intent but we should be focusing on snapping the real-time app. any gotchas about snapcraft should be mentioned briefly and direct the user to the snapcraft docs instead.

i suggest removing the first command and just keeping the one with the --devmode option.
a brief 'note' should suffice to include the original intent of running the first command, e.g.

"We need to install the snap in Developer Mode (`--devmode` option) since the snap is configured with `confinement: devmode`. See [Developer Mode confinement] for more information."

Author: Thanks for your suggestion, I've addressed here 41b32164c24e712ee1. 

Let me know if it's what you expected.

Normally, you'd bypass the signature check by installing in [Dangerous Mode][snap_install_modes], but because the snap has `confinement: devmode` it must be installed in Developer Mode.
That mode not only bypasses the signature verification, but also allows installing snaps with the [Developer Mode confinement][snap_confinement].

```{terminal}
   :input: sudo snap install rt-app_0.1_amd64.snap --devmode
   :user: ubuntu
   :host: ubuntu
   :dir: ~/tutorial

rt-app 0.1 installed
```
Now, the snap appears in the list of installed snaps:

```{terminal}
   :input: snap info rt-app
   :user: ubuntu
   :host: ubuntu
   :dir: ~/tutorial

name:      rt-app
summary:   Demo real time apps
publisher: –
license:   unset
description: |
  Package of a demo real time applications
commands:
  - rt-app.cfs
  - rt-app.edf
  - rt-app.fifo
  - rt-app.lock
  - rt-app.thread-affinity
refresh-date: 4 days ago, at 21:33 -03
installed:    0.1 (x1) 16kB -
```

Finally, you can run the defined real-time applications.
Within a snap, the defined applications become [application commands][application_cmds].

> By typing the name of the installed snap and pressing the Tab key twice, you can list the available commands:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Type the name of the installed snap and press the {kbd}`Tab` key twice to list the available commands:
```

```{terminal}
   :input: rt-app.
   :user: ubuntu
   :host: ubuntu
   :dir: ~/tutorial

rt-app.cfs              rt-app.edf              rt-app.fifo             rt-app.lock             rt-app.thread-affinity
```

Running the `cfs` program:

```{terminal}
   :input: rt-app.cfs
   :user: ubuntu
   :host: ubuntu
   :dir: ~/tutorial

Calls made on thread1: 100000
Calls made on thread2: 1
```

> ### Strictly confining the snap

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Strictly confine the snap
```

In the previous section, you created a snap that works when installed in the Developer Mode.
However, one of the key benefits of snap packages is their ability to run software securely.
Snap packaging provides various [security policies][security_policies] that create a sandboxed environment, enabling software to run in a confined and secure manner.

> To take advantage of these security policies, you must [confine the snap][snap_confinement] so that it can be installed in a strictly confined manner.

Author: In this case, I'm introducing why interfaces are used on snaps, I'm giving the user, the necessary context so he can understand why he is doing what he is doing.

Because, isn't the Tutorial a learning experience? Otherwise, if I only give the user the steps to accomplish an action, wouldn't this be a How-To?

The first step in confinement is understanding which system resources the applications need access to.
[Snap interfaces][snap_interfaces] provide a mechanism to grant narrow access to specific system resources.

> To identify these required resources, you can take two approaches:
> 
> - Perform an extensive source code analysis to identify required files, directories, and [syscalls].
>   This may also include analyzing the access to Linux-specific resources such as [procfs], [sysfs], and [configfs].
> 
> - Use debugging tools to identify runtime accesses made by the application.
> 
> While the first approach is recommended for completeness and accuracy, the second approach is useful when initially confining the application.
> 
> The complexity of the application determines the best approach.
> If the application has multiple configurations, each triggering different execution paths, a full source code analysis is preferable.
> However, if the application has a single, fixed execution path, debugging tools alone may be sufficient.
> 
> A variety of resources and tools exist for [debugging snaps][debug_snaps].
> The recommended tool for debugging and initial confinement is [snappy-debug].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While there are a variety of resources and tools that exist for [debugging snaps][debug_snaps], we can identify these required resources needed for initial confinement with [snappy-debug].
```

For tutorials we strive to ignore alternatives because tutorials should be repeatable; hence we offer a single workflow.
I suggest linking to other topics in (probably) other doc sets as needed that talk more about different ways to analyze resources needed by the snap. 
I don't think it should be covered so extensively in RTU docs.

Author: I've sought for another documentations that contain this differentiation, but I didn't find.
This knowledge comes from a caveat that you end up earning after snap a few applications.

So, I found it very valuable. But I understand that we should offer a single workflow, to comply with that, I've added the extra information as an admonition tip on the end of the confinement header: 72604facb0426

      :user: ubuntu
      :host: ubuntu
      :dir: ~/tutorial

    rt-app 0.1 installed
    ```

  - Connect the `process-control` interface as shown before.
    It might still be connected if the snap wasn't uninstalled during the development steps.

  - Run all the applications.
    You may see some logs on the `snappy-debug` terminal.
    It's necessary to pay attention to the field `profile=` for [AppArmor][apparmor] denials and `exe="` for Seccomp denials. 
    If it says: `profile="/usr/lib/snapd/snap-confine"`, it's related to the `snap-confine` component and not about the `rt-app` snap.
    To learn more about this, take a look at this reference of [the snap system architecture][snap_sys_arch].

You have now finished the development of your snap.
You can change the `grade` field to `stable` if you consider it so.
Snaps with the `devel` grade cannot be promoted to a lower risk level.
This is related to the concept of [snap channels](https://snapcraft.io/docs/channels), important when publishing a snap.

### Conclusion

The final `snapcraft.yaml` file should look like this:

```{literalinclude} snapcraft.yaml
:language: yaml
```

> A good next step is to distribute this snap via a store:

Reviewer: this is helpful! the tutorial provides a next step of what the user can do next.

summary: Single-line elevator pitch for your amazing snap # 79 char long summary
description: |
  This is my-snap's description. You have a paragraph or two to tell the
  most important story about your snap. Keep it under 100 words though,
  we live in tweetspace and your description wants to look good in the snap
  store.

grade: devel # must be 'stable' to release into candidate/stable channels
confinement: devmode # use 'strict' once you have the right plugs and slots

parts:
  my-part:
    # See 'snapcraft plugins'
    plugin: nil
```
You may also want to review the [snapcraft.yaml schema][snapcraft_yaml], which is the reference for all the possible configuration keys for the `snapcraft.yaml` file.

Your working directory should now look like this:

```{terminal}
   :input: tree
   :user: ubuntu
   :host: ubuntu
   :dir: ~/tutorial

.
├── cfs.c
├── edf.c
├── fifo.c
├── lock.c
├── snap
│   └── snapcraft.yaml
└── thread-affinity.c

2 directories, 6 files
```

We'll also make some modifications to the `snapcraft.yaml` file:

- Change the name from **demo** to **rt-app**.
- Provide a meaningful summary and description of what the snap does.

### Defining the snap parts

> Once the Snap metadata boilerplate is in place, it's time to define the [snapcraft parts][snapcraft_parts].

Reviewer 2: It is not common to capitalize "Snap". This document does it inconsistently. 

I'd replace all instances of "Snap" with "snap", except for the beginning of sentences or names such as Snap Store.

In Snaps, `parts` serve as the building blocks of the package, similar to a recipe's list of ingredients and preparation steps.

> Since we have five `.c` source files, we might assume that we need five separate parts.
> While that approach is possible, it's much easier to create a Makefile and use that to build all the program.
> Let's create a Makefile for our real-time apps.
> Adding the build logic to a Makefile simplifies the packaging.
> Let's create one:

Reviewer 2: Are lines 94-95 left here by mistake?

```suggestion
Since we have five `.c` source files, we might assume that we need five separate parts.
While that approach is possible, it's much easier to create a Makefile and use that to build all the programs.
Let's create a Makefile for our real-time apps:
```

```{literalinclude} Makefile
:language: make
```

Because compiling sources with a Makefile is common, Snapcraft provides [built-in plugins][snap_plugins] to simplify the process.
To list the available plugins for your chosen [Snap base][snap_base] (as defined in the `base:` field of `snapcraft.yaml`), run `snapcraft plugins`.
Since we build our `C` code using a Makefile, we can use the [make plugin][make_plugin].

```{tip}
The make plugin relies on the `DESTDIR` variable being available and configurable in the Makefile.
It uses this variable to correctly place the built files inside the snap's squashfs file.
```

> We're also going to rename the part add in the template from `my-part` to something more meaningful, such as `src`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We're also going to rename the part in the template from `my-part` to something more meaningful, such as `src`.
```

To install it:

```{terminal}
   :input: sudo snap install snappy-debug
   :user: ubuntu
   :host: ubuntu
   :dir: ~/tutorial
snappy-debug 0.36-snapd2.59.4 from Canonical✓ installed
```

Now, we need two terminals: one to run `snappy-debug` and another to execute the `rt-app` Snap applications.
Running `snappy-debug` presents the following message:

```{terminal}
   :input: snappy-debug
   :user: ubuntu
   :host: ubuntu
   :dir: ~/tutorial

INFO: Following '/var/log/syslog'. If have dropped messages, use:
INFO: $ sudo journalctl --output=short --follow --all | sudo snappy-debug
```

````{tip}
To ensure no log messages are lost, it is recommended to use the suggested `journalctl` command.
It needs to be run with `sudo` since accessing system logs requires privileged access:

```shell
sudo journalctl --output=short --follow --all | sudo snappy-debug
``` 
````

#### Analyzing `cfs` application

- Application output:
```{terminal}
   :input: rt-app.cfs
   :user: ubuntu
   :host: ubuntu
   :dir: ~/tutorial

Calls made on thread1: 100000
Calls made on thread2: 1
```
- Debug output:

```{terminal}
   :input: rt-app.cfs
   :user: ubuntu
   :host: ubuntu
   :dir: ~/tutorial

> ```

Reviewer 2: ```
ubuntu@ubuntu:~/tutorial$rt-app.cfs
```

The output doesn't look right. Also, this is inconsistent from the following output examples.

Author: Fixed here: https://github.com/canonical/real-time-ubuntu-docs/pull/99/commits/3d5820298e5f4c1553eca0966a0d7fcdf11da168

Repeat the same process done for `cfs` and `edf` applications on this one. 
Like occurred for `cfs`, when running `fifo` application no reports were generated by `snappy-conf`.
The same happens for the `lock` application, no reports were generated.

#### Analyzing `thread-affinity` application

Repeating the process for `thread-affinity` something different happens on the logs:

- Application output:
```{terminal}
   :input: rt-app.thread-affinity
   :user: ubuntu
   :host: ubuntu
   :dir: ~/tutorial

thread1 priority: 0
thread2 priority: 0
Calls made on thread1: 100000
Calls made on thread2: 1
```

- Debug output:
```
= Seccomp =
Time: Mar 27 21:04:22
Log: auid=1000 uid=1000 gid=1000 ses=119 subj=snap.rt-app.thread-affinity pid=40684 comm="thread-affinity" exe="/snap/rt-app/x2/bin/thread-affinity" sig=0 arch=c000003e 203(sched_setaffinity) compat=0 ip=0x733af5a4d6e1 code=0x7ffc0000
Syscall: sched_setaffinity
Suggestion:
* ignore the denial if the program otherwise works correctly (unconditional sched_setaffinity is often just noise)
```

We see a seccomp report, but no suggested interface to use.
Instead there is a message suggesting to just ignore the denial report.

> This happens because there are some denials coming from the security policies defined in the snap sandboxing, which potentially does not affect the functionality of an application.

Reviewer 2: denials (plural) do not ...
```suggestion
This happens because there are some denials coming from the security policies defined in the snap sandboxing, which potentially do not affect the functionality of an application.
```

    Because the snap isn't being installed from a snap store, there is no way to fully trust it.
    It is therefore necessary to acknowledge the **dangerous** nature of it.
    So we run our install command with the `--dangerous` flag.

    ```{terminal}
      :input: sudo snap install ./rt-app_0.1_amd64.snap --dangerous
      :user: ubuntu
      :host: ubuntu
      :dir: ~/tutorial

    rt-app 0.1 installed
    ```

  - Connect the `process-control` interface as shown before.
    It might still be connected if the snap wasn't uninstalled during the development steps.

  - Run all the applications.
    You may see some logs on the `snappy-debug` terminal.
    It's necessary to pay attention to the field `profile=` for [AppArmor][apparmor] denials and `exe="` for Seccomp denials. 
    If it says: `profile="/usr/lib/snapd/snap-confine"`, it's related to the `snap-confine` component and not about the `rt-app` snap.
    To learn more about this, take a look at this reference of [the snap system architecture][snap_sys_arch].

You have now finished the development of your snap.

> You can change the `grade` field to `stable` if you consider it so. Snaps with `devel` grade cannot be promoted to lower risk level. This is related to the concept of [snap channels](https://snapcraft.io/docs/channels), only relevant when publishing a snap.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can change the `grade` field to `stable` if you consider it so. Snaps with the `devel` grade cannot be promoted to a lower risk level. This is related to the concept of [snap channels](https://snapcraft.io/docs/channels), important when publishing a snap.
```
